Flush out docs for updating TPLs: Part 1 (#735)
LLNL/axom: src/docs/sphinx/dev_guide/updating_tpls.rst

.. ## Copyright (c) 2017-2021, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC and
.. ## other Axom Project Developers. See the top-level LICENSE file for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)

.. _tpls-label:

*********************
Third-party Libraries
*********************

Axom dependencies are grouped into four categories: Git submodules,
built-in TPLs in the Axom source tree, system-level TPLs, and other 
TPL libraries. The following sections describe how to install and update 
these dependencies for Axom.

> 

Reviewer: It might be helpful to have a transition sentence. E.g. 

> The following sections describe how to install and update these dependencies for Axom. It also answers questions like:

Author: I am going to delete that section once I answer all those.. they were on the top of the old page.

    and experimentation?
  * Others?

=============
Updating TPLs
=============

Git submodules
--------------

Currently, Axom uses three external packages that appear in the repo
as Git submodules. These are the following, including the location of the
package in the Axom source tree:

  * `BLT <https://github.com/LLNL/blt.git>`_, which is the CMake-based build
    system we use. Location: ``axom/src/cmake/blt``.
  * `Axom Data <https://github.com/LLNL/axom_data.git>`_, which is where we
    maintain data files used in testing Axom. Location: ``axom/data``.
  * `Uberenv <https://github.com/LLNL/uberenv.git>`_, which contains Python
    scripts we use to help automate building third-party dependencies for
    development and deployment. Location: ``axom/scripts/uberenv``.

There is no software installation process for these dependencies in the 
traditional sense. To update one of these packages in Axom, simply go into
its directory in Axom and check out a new version. If a version is intended
to be changed in the Axom repo, make the version change on a branch and 
submit a GitHub pull request as you would do for other software changes.

> 

Reviewer: Should we add a link to our Quick-Start to remind people how to configure/build the code?

E.g. to one of the following:
* https://axom.readthedocs.io/en/docs-white238-tpl_update/docs/sphinx/quickstart_guide/config_build.html
* https://axom.readthedocs.io/en/docs-white238-tpl_update/docs/sphinx/quickstart_guide/index.html

Built-in TPLs
-------------

Axom several lightweight header-only libraries that we use internally and
expose for downstream customers to use if they wish.

  * `CLI11 <https://github.com/CLIUtils/CLI11>`_, is a command line parser
    for C++11 and beyond that provides a rich feature set with a simple and
    intuitive interface.
  * `fmt <https://github.com/fmtlib/fmt>`_, is an open-source formatting
    library providing a fast and safe alternative to C stdio and C++ iostreams.
  * `sol <https://github.com/ThePhD/sol2>`_,  is a C++ library binding to Lua.
  * `Sparsehash <https://github.com/sparsehash/sparsehash>`_, contains several
    hash-map implementations.

> ..note:: Axom patches all built-in TPLs to be under the `axom` namespace.

Reviewer: This `note` didn't render properly. Could be related to indenting/whitespace?

  This is to prevent symbol collisions with other projects, either our
  dependencies or downstream customers who wish their own versions.  For

>   example, `fmt::format("foo")` is `axom::fmt("foo")`.

Reviewer: I think this is:
```suggestion
  example, `fmt::format("foo")` is `axom::fmt::format("foo")`.
```

   where ``local/install/path`` is a directory location where you want the 
   libraries to be installed.

   The script will do a full installation of all TPLs for the plaform you 
   are running on. It will output whether the TPL install succeeded and, 
   subsequently, whether an Axom build against the TPL install succeeded.

   Running the script produces new host-config files (i.e., CMake cache files) 
   that you can use to build and test Axom with the installation, if issues
   arise. The generated host-config files will be located in the top-level Axom
   directory of your local clone of the repo. If any changes to Axom code are 
   needed to work with the TPL update(s), make the changes and test them.

   .. note:: You can build a subset of TPLs for a platform, by passing Spack
             spec arguments to the Python script. For example,

             ``$ ./scripts/llnl_scripts/build_tpls.py --spec clang@10.0.0~cpp14+devtools+mfem+c2c ...``

             will build the TPLs for the clang 10.0.0 compiler. Please see the
             ``scripts/spack/specs.json`` file for available specs. 

#. When you are confident that everything is correct, log in as user

>    ``atk`` to each of the machines named in Axom's standard host-configs and run

Reviewer: Should we add a note that this step has to be done by someone who has access to `atk` ?

>    $ scripts/llnl/build_tpl.py

Reviewer: Suggestion: Can this be in a "code" environment? (e.g. with double ticks)

   This will do all of the standard installations in the shared directories
   used by Axom developers. When completed, they will produce new host-config
   files for each configuration. Give these files to your regular user account
   and log back in to that account. Copy these new host-config files to the
   ``host-configs`` subdirectory and commit them to your branch. Make sure all
   file changes from all previous steps are also committed and pushed upstream.

#. Next, build the docker images for continuous integration using GitHub
   actions. From Axom's GitHub page, click on "Actions" and then on "Docker

>    TPL build" in the "Workflows" menu. Find the "Run Workflow" drop-down

Reviewer: Are there restrictions about who is able to run these actions? 
If so, should we add a note about who to contact, e.g. the axom-dev mailing list?

Author: Pretty sure anyone with branch permissions can run this.

   menu, select your branch, and click on the "Run workflow" button. This

>    will launch the build of the docker images.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Can we please add a link to the github actions page?
E.g.
https://github.com/LLNL/axom/actions/workflows/docker_build_tpls.yml

.. ## Copyright (c) 2017-2021, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC and
.. ## other Axom Project Developers. See the top-level LICENSE file for details.
.. ##
.. ## SPDX-License-Identifier: (BSD-3-Clause)

.. _tpls-label:

*********************
Third-party Libraries
*********************

Axom dependencies are grouped into four categories: Git submodules,
built-in TPLs in the Axom source tree, system-level TPLs, and other 
TPL libraries. The following sections describe how to install and update 
these dependencies for Axom.

  * How does one add a new compiler or platform to the mix?
  * How does one build a new set of TPLs for a single platform or compiler
    for testing?
  * What is the procedure for changing versions of one or more TPLs?
  * How do we keep things straight when using different TPL versions for 
    different branches?
  * How to use the scripts for team TPL support vs. local development 
    and experimentation?
  * Others?

=============
Updating TPLs
=============

Git submodules
--------------

> Currently, Axom uses three external packages that appear in the repo

Reviewer 2: To avoid having to keep these docs consistent with the source repo, should we remove explicit lists like this and instead point users to the .gitmodules file to see which TPLs are managed as submodules?

as Git submodules. These are the following, including the location of the
package in the Axom source tree:

  * `BLT <https://github.com/LLNL/blt.git>`_, which is the CMake-based build
    system we use. Location: ``axom/src/cmake/blt``.
  * `Axom Data <https://github.com/LLNL/axom_data.git>`_, which is where we
    maintain data files used in testing Axom. Location: ``axom/data``.
  * `Uberenv <https://github.com/LLNL/uberenv.git>`_, which contains Python
    scripts we use to help automate building third-party dependencies for
    development and deployment. Location: ``axom/scripts/uberenv``.

There is no software installation process for these dependencies in the 
traditional sense. To update one of these packages in Axom, simply go into
its directory in Axom and check out a new version. If a version is intended
to be changed in the Axom repo, make the version change on a branch and 
submit a GitHub pull request as you would do for other software changes.
More info on :ref:`toolkitbuild-label`.

Built-in TPLs
-------------

Axom several lightweight header-only libraries that we use internally and
expose for downstream customers to use if they wish.

> 

Reviewer 2: Similar comment to above (about doc maintenance and doc/source repo consistency) about avoiding explicit list of names and just point folks to the src/thirdparty directory.

Author: I think we should leave these two lists in.  These rarely change and the .gitmodules file and thirdparty directory dont explain what they are for.  But i dont feel strongly about this.

  * `CLI11 <https://github.com/CLIUtils/CLI11>`_, is a command line parser
    for C++11 and beyond that provides a rich feature set with a simple and
    intuitive interface.
  * `fmt <https://github.com/fmtlib/fmt>`_, is an open-source formatting
    library providing a fast and safe alternative to C stdio and C++ iostreams.
  * `sol <https://github.com/ThePhD/sol2>`_, is a C++ library binding to Lua.
  * `Sparsehash <https://github.com/sparsehash/sparsehash>`_, contains several
    hash-map implementations.

> .. note:: Axom patches all built-in TPLs to be under the `axom` namespace.

Reviewer 2: Replace `foo` (single quotes) with ``foo`` (double quotes) when it is an acutal software construct; e.g., namespace, directory/file name, etc. Here and other places where we see them.

Author: hadn't gotten to this yet (bulk move before reworking). updated.

   This is to prevent symbol collisions with other projects, either our
   dependencies or downstream customers who wish their own versions.  For
   example, `fmt::format("foo")` is `axom::fmt::format("foo")`.

They can be found in our repository here: `src/thirdparty`. The basic 
instructions on how to update a built-in TPL are as follows:

#. Download the new release and override the source that is already there.

>    This can often involve removing no-longer needed files but most of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This can often involve removing files no-longer needed but most of the
```

   current ones are a single header file.

#. Review and apply the existing patch files. More than likely, you will not
   be able to directly apply the patch but it will give you the general idea
   on what needs to be applied.  For example, the namespace update mentioned above.

#. Ensure that the build and tests still pass. More info on :ref:`testing-label`.

#. Follow the normal pull request work flow. More info on :ref:`pullrequest-label`.

TPLs (system-level and external libraries)
------------------------------------------

The following instructions describe how to install local copies of Axom
TPLs on Livermore Computing (LC) platforms. Typically, this process is 
followed when you want to build and test Axom against new versions of TPLs
to make sure everything works properly before deploying a new TPL set for

> other Axom developers to use, to use in Axom CI testing, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
other Axom developers to use during development, to use in Axom Gitlab CI testing, etc.
```

#. **Working on a local branch.** 
   Make a local clone of the Axom repo and create a branch to work on. Working
   on a separate branch is a good practice to avoid propagating mis-steps
   to other users and/or developers.

#. **Changing versions of system packages or other TPLs.**
   To change a version of a system package, which applies to an LC platforms 

>    or a Docker container image we use for CI testing on GitHub, go into

Reviewer 2: It may be better to pull out the comments related to containers and GitHub/azure testing into their own section so it's clear what needs to be done to update each.

Author: There is a lot of overlap between the two.  I think if we break them into two sections it will be a lot of duplication. Azure has its own step down below that is separate from LC steps.  I will clarify which parts are which though.

   where ``local/install/path`` is a directory location where you want the 
   libraries to be installed.

   The script will do a full installation of all TPLs for the plaform you 
   are running on. It will output whether the TPL install succeeded and, 
   subsequently, whether an Axom build against the TPL install succeeded.

   Running the script produces new host-config files (i.e., CMake cache files) 
   that you can use to build and test Axom with the installation, if issues
   arise. The generated host-config files will be located in the top-level Axom
   directory of your local clone of the repo. If any changes to Axom code are 
   needed to work with the TPL update(s), make the changes and test them.

   .. note:: You can build a subset of TPLs for a platform, by passing Spack
             spec arguments to the Python script. For example,

             ``$ ./scripts/llnl_scripts/build_tpls.py --spec clang@10.0.0~cpp14+devtools+mfem+c2c ...``

             will build the TPLs for the clang 10.0.0 compiler. Please see the
             ``scripts/spack/specs.json`` file for available specs. 

#. When you are confident that everything is correct, become the service user

>    ``atk``, which requires a certain level of permission, on each of the

Reviewer 2: should a comment about how to become atk be included?

to be changed in the Axom repo, make the version change on a branch and 
submit a GitHub pull request as you would do for other software changes.
More info on :ref:`toolkitbuild-label`.

Built-in TPLs
-------------

Axom several lightweight header-only libraries that we use internally and
expose for downstream customers to use if they wish.

  * `CLI11 <https://github.com/CLIUtils/CLI11>`_, is a command line parser
    for C++11 and beyond that provides a rich feature set with a simple and
    intuitive interface.
  * `fmt <https://github.com/fmtlib/fmt>`_, is an open-source formatting
    library providing a fast and safe alternative to C stdio and C++ iostreams.
  * `sol <https://github.com/ThePhD/sol2>`_, is a C++ library binding to Lua.
  * `Sparsehash <https://github.com/sparsehash/sparsehash>`_, contains several
    hash-map implementations.

.. note:: Axom patches all built-in TPLs to be under the ``axom`` namespace.
   This is to prevent symbol collisions with other projects, either our
   dependencies or downstream customers who wish their own versions.  For
   example, ``fmt::format("foo")`` is ``axom::fmt::format("foo")``.

> They can be found in our repository here: `src/thirdparty`. The basic 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They can be found in the directory: ``src/thirdparty``. The basic 
```

directory of your local clone of the repo. If any changes to Axom code are 
needed to work with the TPL update(s), make the changes and test them.

.. note:: You can build a subset of TPLs for a platform, by passing a Spack
          spec arguments to the `build_tpls.py` script. For example,

          ``--spec clang@10.0.0~cpp14+devtools+mfem+c2c``

          will build the TPLs for the clang 10.0.0 compiler. Please see the
          ``scripts/spack/specs.json`` file for a list of currently tested specs. 

Shared Third-party Library Installation Steps
---------------------------------------------

The following instructions describe how to install local copies of Axom
TPLs on Livermore Computing (LC) platforms and recreate our Docker containers
with a new set of TPLs. Typically, this process is followed when you want to 
update one or more TPLs which Axom depends on. After they are built and
the required changes are merged into develop, they will be available for
other Axom developers to use during development, in Axom Gitlab CI testing, etc.

#. **Working on a local branch.** 
   Make a local clone of the Axom repo and create a branch to work on. Working

>    on a separate branch is a good practice to avoid propagating mis-steps

Reviewer 2: Is the second sentence needed? Our main and develop branches are protected on GitHub to prevent accidental pollution.

   to other users and/or developers.

#. **Changing versions of system packages or other TPLs.**
   To change a version of a system package, which applies to an LC platforms 
   or a Docker container image we use for CI testing on GitHub, go into
   the directory ``axom/scripts/spack/configs``. There you will find a 
   sub-directory for each supported LC system type. Each sub-directory
   has a ``packages.yaml`` file which contains an entry for each system level
   package we rely on. Find the entry for the library you wish to update and 
   change the version number. Do this for each system you want to test/change,

>    including configurations in the `docker` subdirectory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   including configurations in the ``docker`` subdirectory.
```

   .. note:: Alongside each ``packages.yaml`` in each system package directory,
             there is a ``compilers.yaml`` file containing compiler and 
             version information for compilers we use for development and 
             testing. If you wish to test and build with a new compiler or 
             version on a system, modify the appropriate ``compilers.yaml`` 
             file.

   To change a version of a non-system TPL, go into the 
   ``axom/scripts/spack/packages`` directory. There you will find a 
   sub-directory for each TPL Axom uses. Modify the contents of the Spack
   package file ``package.py`` in each package sub-directory as needed. 

>    .. note:: Before continuing, you will want to test the installation works

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. note:: Before continuing, you should test that the installation works
```

             on all LC systems with the steps in :ref:`local-tpls-label`.

#. **Install TPLs on all required LC machines.**

>    This step need to be run on each of the machines named in Axom's standard host-configs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This step needs to be run on each of the machines named in Axom's standard host-configs.
```

   When you are confident that everything is correct, become the service user
   ``atk`` via the following command::

   $ xsu atk

>    .. note:: This command requires a certain level of permission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   .. note:: This command requires special access permissions. If you need them, contact the Axom team.
```

   Run the corresponding command for the system you are on::

     # blueos
     $ lalloc 1 -W 120 scripts/llnl/build_tpl.py
     
     # toss3
     $ srun -N1 --interactive -t 120 scripts/llnl/build_tpl.py

   This script will build all third-party libraries for all compilers specs

>    for the machine you are on. These will be installed into shared directories

Reviewer 2: A couple of questions about this:

1. Should we note the LC directory where these are installed?
2. What happens if a build fails? Do broken build artifacts get installed, or deleted? Do all the other builds generated by the script also get delted, even if successful?

Author: i fixed 1.. and added a note about when you should cleanup old builds.  To answer the last part, no we do not delete old builds as a part of any script.  we generally wait a long time then bulk delete them manually.

     $ srun -N1 --interactive -t 120 scripts/llnl/build_tpl.py

   This script will build all third-party libraries for all compilers specs

>    for the machine you are on. These will be installed into the shared LC directory

Reviewer 2: 👍

   ``host-configs`` subdirectory and commit them to your branch. Make sure all
   file changes from all previous steps are also committed and pushed upstream.

>    .. note:: If this step fails, delete the time date stamped directory that was created.

Reviewer 2: 👍
